Chapter 8 of Meditations of Marcus Aurelius.
This is a LibriVox recording. All LibriVox recordings are in the public domain.
For more information or to volunteer, please visit LibriVox.org.
Recording by Father Zeile of Detroit, Michigan.
The Meditations of Marcus Aurelius by Marcus Aurelius Antoninus. Translated by George Long.
Chapter 8.
This reflection also tends to the removal of the desire of empty fame, that it is no longer in
thy power to have lived the whole of thy life, or at least thy life from thy youth upwards,
like a philosopher. But both to many others and to thyself, it is plain that thou art far from
philosophy. Thou hast fallen into disorder then, so that it is no longer easy for thee to get the
reputation of a philosopher, and thy plan of life also opposes it. If then thou hast truly seen
where the matter lies, throw away the thought. How thou shalt seem to others, and be content
if thou shalt live the rest of thy life in such wise as thy nature wills. Observe then what it
wills, and let nothing else distract thee. But thou hast had experience of many wanderings without
having found happiness anywhere, not in syllogisms, nor in wealth, nor in reputation, nor in enjoyment,
nor anywhere. Where is it then? In doing what man's nature requires. How then shall a man do this?
If he has principles, from which come his effects and his acts. What principles?
Those which relate to good and bad. The belief that there is nothing good for man,
which does not make him just, temperate, manly, free, and that there is nothing bad,
which does not do the contrary to what has been mentioned.
On the occasion of every act, ask thyself, how is this with respect to me? Shall I repent of it?
A little time, and I am dead, and all is gone. What more do I seek, if what I am doing now
is the work of an intelligent living being, and a social being, and one who is under the same law with God?
Alexander, and Caius, and Pompeius. What are they in comparison with Diogenes, and Heraclitus,
and Socrates? For they were acquainted with things, and their causes, forms, and their matter,
and the ruling principles of these men were the same, or conformable to their pursuits.
But as to the others, how many things had they to care for,
and to how many things were they slaves?
Consider that men will do the same things nevertheless, even though thou shouldst burst.
This is the chief thing. Be not perturbed, for all things are according to the nature of the universal,
and in a little time thou wilt be nobody and nowhere, like Hadrianus and Augustus.
In the next place, having fixed thy eye steadily on thy business, look at it,
and at the same time remembering that it is thy duty to do the same thing,
to be a good man, and what man's nature demands. Do that without turning aside,
and speak as it seems to thee most just, only let it be with a good disposition,
and with modesty, and without hypocrisy.
The nature of the universal has this work to do, to remove to that place the things which
are in this, to change them, to take them away hence, and to carry them there.
All things are change, yet we need not fear anything new.
All things are familiar to us, but the distribution of them still remains the same.
Every nature is contented with itself when it goes on its way well,
and a rational nature goes on its way well, when in its thoughts it ascends to nothing false
or uncertain, and when it directs its movements to social acts only, and when it confines its
desires and aversions to the things which are in its power, and when it is satisfied with everything
that is assigned to it by the common nature. For of this common nature every particular nature
is a part, as the nature of the leaf is a part of the nature of the plant, except that in the plant
the nature of the leaf is part of a nature which has not perception or reason, and is subject to
be impeded. But the nature of man is part of a nature which is not subject to impediments,
and is intelligent and just, since it gives to everything in equal portions,
and according to its worth, times, substance, cause, form, activity, and incident. But examine
not to discover that any one thing compared with any other single thing is equal in all respects,
but by taking all the parts together of one thing and comparing them with all the parts together
of another.
Thou hast not leisure or ability to read, but thou hast leisure or ability to check arrogance.
Thou hast leisure to be superior to pleasure and pain. Thou hast leisure to be superior to love
of fame, and not to be vexed at stupid and ungrateful people, nay even to care for them.
Let no man any longer hear thee finding fault with the court life or with thy own.
Repentance is a kind of self-reproof for having neglected something useful, but that which is
good must be something useful, and the perfect good man should look after it. But no such man
would ever repent of having refused any sensual pleasure. Pleasure, then, is neither good nor
useful. This thing, what is it in itself, in its own constitution? What is its substance and material,
and what its causal nature or form, and what is it doing in the world, and how long does it
persist? When thou risest from sleep with reluctance, remember that it is according to
thy constitution, and according to human nature, to perform social acts. But sleeping is common
also to irrational animals. But that which is according to each individual's nature is also more
peculiarly its own, and more suitable to its nature, and indeed also more agreeable.
Constantly, and, if it be possible, on the occasion of every impression on the soul,
apply to it the principles of physics, of ethics, of dialectics.
Whatever man thou meetest with, immediately say to thyself,
What opinions has this man about good and bad? For it, with respect to pleasure and pain,
and the causes of each, and with respect to famine and ignominy, death and life,
he has such and such opinions. It will seem nothing wonderful or strange to me,
if he does such and such things. And I shall bear in mind that he is compelled to do so.
Remember that as it is a shame to be surprised if the fig tree produces figs, so it is to be
surprised if the world produces such and such things of which it is productive. And for the
helmsman, it is a shame to be surprised if a man has a fever, or if the wind, if unfavorable.
Remember that to change thy opinion and to follow him who corrects thy error
is as consistent with freedom as it is to persist in thy error. For it is thy own,
the activity which is exerted according to thy own movement and judgment,
and indeed according to thy own understanding, too.
If a thing is in thy own power, why dost thou do it? But if it is in the power of another,
whom dost thou blame? The atoms, chance, or the gods? Both are foolish. Thou must blame nobody.
For if thou canst correct what is the cause, but if thou canst not do this, correct at least the
thing itself. But if thou canst not do even this, of what use it to thee to find fault?
For nothing should be done without a purpose.
That which has died falls not out of the universe. If it stays here, it also changes here and is
dissolved into its proper parts, which are elements of the universe and of thyself. And these, too,
change, and they murmur not.
Everything exists for some end, a horse, a vine. Why dost thou wonder? Even the sun will say,
I am for some purpose, and the rest of the gods will say the same. For what purpose then art thou,
to enjoy pleasure? See if common sense allows this.
Nature has had regard in everything no less to the end than to the beginning, and the continuance,
just like the man who throws up a ball. What good is it, then, for the ball to be thrown up,
or harm for it to come down, or even to have fallen? And what good is it to the bubble while
it holds together, or what harm when it is burst? The same may be said of a light also,
though. Turn it, the body, inside out, and see what kind of thing it is, and when it has grown
old, what kind of thing it becomes, and when it is diseased. Short-lived are both the praiser and
the praised, and the rememberer and the remembered. And all this in a nook of this part of the world,
and not even here do all agree, no, not any one with himself, and the whole earth, too, is a point.
Attend to the matter which is before thee, whether it is an opinion, or an act, or a word.
Thou suffer'st this justly, for thou choose'st rather to become good tomorrow than to be good
today. Am I doing anything? I do it with reference to the good of mankind.
Does anything happen to me? I receive it and refer it to the gods,
and the source of all things, from which all that happens is derived.
Such as bathing appears to thee, oil, sweat, dirt, filthy water, all things disgusting,
so is every part of life and everything. Lucilla saw Varus die, and then Lucilla died.
Secunda saw Maximus die, and then Secunda died. Epitecanos saw Deotemus die, and then Epitecanos
died. Antoninus saw Faustina die, and then Antoninus died. Such is everything.
Chaelor saw Hadrianus die, and then Chaelor died. And those sharp-witted men, either seers or men
inflated with pride, where are they? For instance, the sharp-witted men Charax and Demetrius,
the Platonists, and Eudaimon, and anyone else like them, all ephemeral, dead long ago.
Some indeed have not been remembered even for a short time, and others have become the heroes
of fables, and again others have disappeared even from fables. Remember this, then, that this
little compound thyself must either be dissolved or thy poor breath must be extinguished or be
removed and placed elsewhere. It is satisfaction to a man to do the proper works of a man.
Now it is a proper work of a man to be benevolent to his own kind, to despise the movements of the
senses, to form a just judgment of plausible appearances, and to take a survey of the nature
of the universe and of the things which happen in it. There are three relations between thee and
the other, to the divine cause from which all things come to all, and the third to those who
live with thee. Pain is either an evil to the body, then let the body say what it thinks of it,
or to the soul. But it is in the power of the soul to maintain its own serenity and tranquility,
and not to think that pain is an evil. For every judgment and movement and desire
and aversion is within, and no evil ascends so high. Wipe out thy imaginations by often saying
to thyself, now it is in my power to let no badness be in this soul, nor desire, nor any
perturbation at all. But looking at all things, I see what is their nature, and I use each according
to its value. Remember this power which thou hast from nature. Speak both in the Senate and to every
man, whoever he may be, appropriately, not with any affectation. Use plain discourse.
Augustus court, wife, daughter, descendants, ancestors, sister, Agrippa, kinsmen, intimates,
friends, Arius, Machinus, physicians, and sacrificing priests. The whole court is dead.
Then turn to the rest, not considering the death of a single man, but of a whole race,
as of the Pompeii, and that which is inscribed on the tombs, the last of his race.
Then consider what trouble those before them have had that they might leave a successor,
and then that of necessity someone must be the last. Again, here consider the death of a whole race.
It is thy duty to order thy life well in every single act, and if every act does its duty as far
as is possible, be content, and no one is able to hinder thee, so that each act shall not do its duty.
But something external will stand in the way. Nothing will stand in the way of thy acting
justly and soberly and considerably, but perhaps some other active power will be hindered.
Well, but by acquiescing in the hindrance and by being content to transfer thy efforts to that
which is allowed, another opportunity of action is immediately put before thee in place of that
which was hindered, and one will adapt itself to this ordering of which we are speaking.
Receive wealth or prosperity without arrogance, and be ready to let it go.
If thou didst ever see a hand cut off, or a foot, or a head lying anywhere apart from the rest of the
body, which does a man make himself as far as he can who is not content with what happens,
and separates himself from others, or does anything unsocial,
suppose that thou hast detached thyself from the natural unity, for thou wast made by nature
apart, but now thou hast cut thyself off. Yet here there is this beautiful provision,
that it is in thy power again to unite thyself. God has allowed this to no other part,
after it has been separated and cut asunder to come together again. But consider the kindness
by which he has distinguished man, for he has put it in his power not to be separated at all from
the universal, and when he has been separated, he has allowed him to return and to be united,
and to resume his place as apart.
As the nature of the universal has given to every rational being all the other powers that it has,
so we have received from it this power also. For as the universal nature converts and fixes
in its predestined place everything which stands in the way and opposes it, and makes such things
apart of itself, so also the rational animal is able to make every hindrance its own material,
and to use it for such purposes as it may have designed.
Do not disturb thyself by thinking of the whole of thy life. Let not thy thoughts at once embrace
all the various troubles which thou mayest expect to befall thee, but on every occasion
ask thyself, what is there in this which is intolerable and past bearing? For thou wilt
be ashamed to confess. In the next place remember that neither the future nor the past pains thee,
but only the present. But this is reduced to a very little, if thou only circumscribest it
and chidest thy mind if it is unable to hold out against even this.
Does Panthea or Pergamos now sit by the tomb of Verus? Does Chaureus or Deometas sit by the
tomb of Hadrianus? That would be ridiculous. Well suppose they did sit there, would the dead be
conscious of it? And if the dead were conscious, would they be pleased? And if they were pleased,
would that make them immortal? Was it not in the order of destiny that these persons should first
become old women and old men and then die? What then would those do after these were dead?
All this is foul smell and blood in a bag.
If thou can see sharp, look and judge wisely, says the philosopher. In the constitution of the
rational animal, I see no virtue which is opposed to justice, but I see a virtue which is opposed
to love of pleasure, and that is temperance. If thou takest away thy opinion about that which
to give thee pain, thou thyself standest in perfect security. Who is this self, the reason?
But I am not reason, be it so. Let then the reason itself not trouble itself,
but if any other part of thee suffers, let it have its own opinion about itself.
Hindrance to the perceptions of sense is an evil to the animal nature. Hindrance to the movement's
desires is equally an evil to the animal nature, and something else also is equally an impediment
and evil to the constitution of plants. So then that which is a hindrance to the intelligence
is an evil to the intelligent nature. Apply all these things to thyself.
Does pain or sensuous pleasure affect thee? The senses will look to that.
Has any obstacle opposed thee in thy efforts toward an object? If indeed thou was making
this effort absolutely, unconditionally, or without any reservation, certainly this obstacle is an
irrational animal. But if thou takest into consideration the usual course of things,
thou hast not yet been injured or even impeded. The things, however, which are proper to the
understanding, no other man is used to impede, for neither fire nor iron nor tyrant nor purse
touches it in any way. When it has been made a sphere, it continues a sphere.
It is not fit that I should give myself pain, for I have never intentionally given pain even to another.
Different things delight different people, but it is my delight to keep the ruling faculty sound
without turning either from any man or from any of the things which happen to man, but looking at
receiving all with welcome eyes and using everything according to its nature.
See that thou secure this present time to thyself. For those who rather pursue posthumous fame,
do not consider that the men of after time will be exactly such as these whom they cannot bear now,
and both are mortal. And what is it in any way to thee if these men of after time utter this
or that sound, or have this or that opinion about thee?
Take me and cast me where thou wilt, for there I shall keep my divine part tranquil,
that is, content if it can feel and act comfortably to its proper constitution.
Is this change of place sufficient reason why man, my soul, should be unhappy and worse than it was,
depressed, expanded, shrinking, or frightened? And what wilt thou find which is sufficient reason for this?
Nothing can happen to any man which is not human accident, nor to an ox which is not according to
nature of a vine, nor to a stone which is not proper to a stone. If then there happens to each
thing both what is usual and natural, why shouldst thou complain? For the common nature brings nothing
which may not be borne by thee. If thou art pained by any external thing, it is not this that
but by thy own judgment about it, and it is in thy power to wipe out this judgment now.
But if anything in thy own disposition gives thee pain, who hinders thee from correcting thy opinion?
And even if thou art pained because thou art not doing some particular thing which seems to thee
to be right, why dost thou not rather act than complain? But some insuperable obstacle is in
thy way. Do not be grieved then, for the cause of its not being done depends not on thee. But it is
not worthwhile to live. If this cannot be done, take thy departure then from life contentedly,
just as he dies who is in full activity, and well pleased to with the things which are obstacles.
Remember that the ruling faculty is invincible. When self-collected, it is satisfied with itself.
If it does nothing which it does not choose to do, even if it resists from mere obstinacy,
what then will it meet when it forms a judgment about anything aided by reason and deliberately?
Therefore, the mind which is freedom from passions is a citadel. For man is free from
nothing more secure to which he can fly for refuge and for the future to be inexpungible.
He then who has not seen this is an ignorant man, but he who has seen it and does not fly
to this refuge is unhappy. Say nothing more to thyself than what the first appearances report.
Suppose that it has been reported to thee that a certain person speaks ill of thee.
This has been reported, but that thou hast been injured this has not been reported.
I see that my child is sick, I do see, but that he is in danger I do not see.
Thus then always abide by the permanent appearances, and add nothing thyself from within,
and when nothing happens to thee, or rather add something like a man who knows everything
that happens in the world. A cucumber is bitter, throw it away.
There are briars in the road, turn aside from them. This is enough. Do not add,
and why were such things made in the world? For thou wilt be ridiculed by a man who is
ridiculed by a carpenter and a shoemaker, if thou didst find fault, because thou seest in
their workshops savings and cuttings from which they make. And yet they have places into which
they can throw these shavings and cuttings, and the universal nature has no external space.
But the wondrous part of her art is that though she has circumscribed herself,
everything within her which appears to decay and to grow old and to be useless,
she changes into herself, and again makes new things from these very same, so that she requires
neither substance from without, nor wants a place into which she may cast that which delays.
She is content then with her own space, and her own matter, and her own heart.
Neither in thy actions be sluggish, nor in thy conversation without method,
nor wandering in thy thoughts, nor let there be in thy soul inward contention
or external effusion, nor in life be so busy as to leave no pleasure.
Suppose that men kill thee, cut thee in pieces, curse thee. What then can these things do to
prevent thy mind from remaining pure, wise, sober, just? For instance, if a man should stand by a
limpid pure spring and curse it, the spring never ceases setting up potable water. And if he should
cast clay into it or filth, it will speedily disperse them and wash them out, and will not be
at all polluted. How then shall thou possess a perpetual fountain and not a mere wall,
by forming thyself hourly to freedom, conjoined with contentment, simplicity, and modesty?
He who does not know what the world is, does not know where he is. And he who does not know for what
purpose the world exists, does not know who he is, nor what the world is. But he who has failed in
any of these things could not even say for what purpose he exists himself. What then does thou
think of him who avoids or seeks the praise of those who applaud, of men who know not either
where they are or who they are? Does thou wish to be praised by a man who curses himself Christ
every hour? Wouldst thou wish to please a man who does not please himself? Does a man please himself
who repents of nearly everything that he does? No longer let thy breathing only act in concert
with the air which surrounds thee, but let thy intelligence also now be in harmony with the
intelligence which embraces all things. For the intelligent power is no less diffused in all parts
and pervades all things from him who is willing to draw it to him than the aerial power for him who
is able to respire it. Generally wickedness does no harm at all to the universe and particularly
the wickedness of one man does no harm or another. It is only harmful to him who has it in his power
to be released from it as soon as he shall choose. To my own free will, the free will of my neighbor
is just as indifferent as his poor health and flesh. For though we are made especially for the
sake of one another, still the ruling power of each of us has its own office, for otherwise my
neighbor's wickedness would be my harm, which God has not willed in order that my unhappiness
might not depend on another. The sun appears to be poured down
and in all directions indeed it is diffused, yet it is not diffused, for this diffusion is extension.
Accordingly its rays are called extensions, Greek, because they are extended, Greek. But one may judge
what kind of a thing a ray is if he looks at the night's light passing through a narrow opening
into a darkened room, for it is extended in a right line and as it were is divided
when it meets with any solid body which stands in the way and intercepts the air beyond.
But there the light remains fixed and does not glide or fall. Such then ought to be the outpouring
and defection of the understanding, and it should in no way be an effusion but an extension,
and it should make no violent or impetuous collision with the obstacles which are in its
way, nor yet fall down, but be fixed and enlightened that which receives it, for a body will deprive
itself of the illumination if it does not admit it. He who fears death either fears the loss of sensation
or a different kind of sensation, but if thou shalt have no sensation neither wilt thou feel
any harm, and if thou shalt acquire another kind of sensation thou wilt be a kind of living being
and who will not cease. Men exist for the sake of one another. Teach them then or bear with them.
In one way an arrow moves, in another way the mind. The mind indeed both when it exercises
caution and when it is employed about iniquity moves straight onward, not the less, into its object.
Enter into every man's ruling faculty and also let every other man enter into thine.
End of Chapter 8, recording by Father Zeile of Detroit, Michigan, June 2007.